.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)caesar.6	8.2 (Berkeley) 11/16/93
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 12, 2021
.Dt ROT13 6
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rot13
.Nd encrypt or decrypt caesar ciphers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl p|--printable
.Op Fl r|--rotate Ar number
.Op Fl -debug
.Op Fl -help|-?
.Op Fl -version
.Op Fl -
.Op Ar "string ..."
.Op Ar "filename ..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility encrypts or decrypts caesar ciphers using a rotation of 13 characters.
By default,
.Nm
reads from the standard input and writes to the standard output.
If an optional parameter corresponding to a valid filename is given,
.Nm
will process this file instead.
If the optional parameter is not a filename,
.Nm
will rotate this string.
.Ss OPTIONS
.Op Fl p|--printable
Rotate all printable ASCII characters instead of just the alphabetical ones
.Pp
.Op Fl r|--rotate Ar number
Rotate ''number'' characters instead of 13
.Pp
.Op Fl -debug
Enable debug mode
.Pp
.Op Fl -help|-?
Print usage and this help message and exit
.Pp
.Op Fl -version
Print version and exit
.Pp
.Op Fl -
Options processing terminator
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The
.Ev ROT13_DEBUG
environment variable can also be set to any value to enable debug mode.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std rot13
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr caesar 6 ,
.Xr fortune 6
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
utility is a standard UNIX command, though not a POSIX one.
.Pp
It tries to follow the PEP 8 style guide for Python code.
.Sh PORTABILITY
Tested OK under Windows.
.Sh HISTORY
Rotated postings to
.Tn USENET
and some of the databases used by the
.Xr fortune 6
program are rotated by 13 characters.
.Pp
This re-implementation was made for the
.Lk https://github.com/HubTou/PNU PNU project
.Pp
The ability to process optional strings or filenames,
as well as choosing a different rotation or character set,
has been added in this re-implementation.
.Sh LICENSE
This utility is available under the 3-clause BSD license.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Hubert Tournier
.Pp
The man page is derived from the FreeBSD project's one.
.Sh CAVEATS
Unicode characters are left unchanged.
.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
This command's only purpose is to obfuscate a text, rather than seriously intending to protect it.
This last purpose has been deprecated about 2000 years ago!
